# Simplex-Benchmarks
Benchmark code for "Matrix-Free Evaluation Strategies for Continuous and Discontinuous Galerkin Discretizations on Unstructured Tetrahedral Grids"

This repository implements the optimized matrix-free finite-element operator described in
*Still, Fehn, Wall & Kronbichler, "Matrix-Free Evaluation Strategies for Continuous and
Discontinuous Galerkin Discretizations on Unstructured Tetrahedral Grids"* (submitted).
The implementation targets low- to moderate-order polynomial discretizations on tetrahedral
meshes and attains high node-level performance by (i) batching element interpolation into
dense matrix–matrix kernels, (ii) exploiting explicit SIMD data-parallelism, and
(iii) applying a hierarchical mesh-reordering to improve data locality. The code is based
on the [deal.II](https://www.dealii.org/) library and integrates a hybrid multigrid
preconditioner for the Poisson problem used in the paper.

## Optimizations
Section 2.4 of the manuscript gives details of different optimizations applied to the code. The matrix-free operators implemet the `vmult` functionallity, evaluating the matrix-vector product with a given vector.  
The methods described in the paragraph "Data Structures/Broadcasting", namely broadcasting the data evaluated on the reference elements to all SIMD lanes, was introduced to deal.ii in [PR #16985](https://github.com/dealii/dealii/pull/16985). Optimizations to the matrix-vector product kernels were performed in [PR #16984](https://github.com/dealii/dealii/pull/16984) and the components-batched strategy, as described in paragraph "Matrix-Matrix Product" was implemented in [PR #17797](https://github.com/dealii/dealii/pull/17797), see also Section 3.1 for more information.
The code in this repository uses the mentioned optimizations, while avoiding the overhead generated by the generic deal.ii functionallity, as described in the "Instruction Scheduling" variant. Therefore, each programm consists of several blocks, comments on the implementation are given in `/CG/cells_batched/application.cc`, the other files include further explanations on additional details.
A core ingredient are the matrix-matrix multiplication kernels, which include spatial blocking and manual loop unrolling. The matrix-free operators for different applications are defined in each. Thereby, the code is seperated for continuous finite elements (CG) and discontinuous elements (DG), each with its own folder. Each has a versions following the cells batched strategy for scalar problems and the components batched strategy for vector-valued fields problems, see also Section 3.1 in the paper.
Main differences for the DG compared to the CG versions are in the face integrals (see Equations 2.3 and 2.7) and the storage scheme for the indices (Equation 2.10), influencing the read/write functionallities. The main differences between the cells batched and components batched strategy can be seen in the DG case, where consistent face batches have to be formed for the former version.
The reordering scheme presented in Section 2.5 is implemented for external grids and can optinally be turned off.

## Multigrid
The hybrid multigrid preconditioners, as presented in Section 4.1 are implemented for both discretizations for the cells batched strategies. The apply the same optimized matrix-free operators as explained above while building on top of the multigrid infrastrcture provided by deal.ii. For the DG operator not only geometric multigrid (h-MG) and polynomial multigrid (p-MG) are used, but also an additional auxiliary continuous space (c-MG). The code can switch between mixed-precision MG and double precision for the preconditioner.

## Helmholz like operator
The Helmholz like operator, presented in Section 4.2, is implemented with the components batched strategy for DG elements. The optimizations from Section 2.4 are applied not only for evaluating the gradients but also the values at each quadrature point, as is necessary for some applications, showing how the optimization strategies are flexible for evluating residuls of different PDE operators. 

## Running the code
The code is build on the deal.ii libary (https://github.com/dealii/dealii) and runs with version 5037bf40bd.

To run an example, go to the corresponding folder, build the benchmark and run it, e.g. by

```
cmake -D DEAL_II_DIR=/path/to/deal.II .
make -j <Nproc>
mpirun -n <Nproc> ./bench <dim> <degree>
```
Select dim as 3 and degree between 1 and 3. To run the hybrid multigrid benchmarks, go the corresponding folder and build the version of the multigrid preconditioner you want to run. The two or three letter abbreviations are the transfer operations in corresponding order. Further code for the hybrid multigrid can be found [here](https://github.com/dominiktassilostill/exadg/tree/maskedgather2), optimized hexahedral code can be found [here](https://github.com/kronbichler/multigrid/).
